JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
James Comey breaks his silence.
The former FBI director, in a
statement to the U.S. Senate,
details how President Trump
asked for his personal loyalty,
asked to drop the investigation
into Michael Flynn, and
called Russia a cloud
hanging over the presidency.
Then: The pressure is on.
Top U.S. intelligence
officials remain
tight-lipped in a high-stakes
congressional hearing about
whether the president has
tried to influence them.
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH (D), New
Mexico: You could clear an awful
lot up by simply saying it
never happened.
DAN COATS, U.S. National
Intelligence Director:
I don't share -- I don't
share with the general
public conversations that
I have with the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
a twist on terrorism
in the Middle East.
A stunning dual attack in Iran
leaves at least 12 dead and
40 wounded, with ISIS claiming
responsibility.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Our lead
story tonight: James
Comey tells his story.
In a prepared statement
to the Senate Intelligence
Committee, released one
day ahead of his hearing
tomorrow, the former
FBI director details his
personal conversations
with the president,
nine in total, compared
with just two during three
years with President Obama.
Comey describes how Mr. Trump
asked repeatedly for a pledge
of personal loyalty, asked that
he drop the investigation
into General Michael
Flynn, and complained that
allegations surrounding
Russia were a cloud
over his presidency.
Comey also confirms that he told
President Trump that he wasn't
under investigation himself.
Moments ago, Mr. Trump's
attorney responded in
a written statement,
quoting, "The president
is pleased," it says, "that
Mr. Comey has finally publicly
confirmed his private reports
that the president wasn't
under investigation
in any Russia probe."
And continuing, he wrote, "The
president feels completely
and totally vindicated."
Now, there is a
lot to unpack here.
We're going to walk through
much of it now with reporter
Matt Apuzzo of The New York
Times and with John Carlin.
He served as assistant attorney
general for national security
from 2014 until October
of last year.
He's now an attorney
in private practice.
And let's start with their
first meeting on January 6
at Trump Tower in New York.
And, Matt, and -- we're going
-- I'm going to ask both of
you right now about this.
To set a little background,
it was New York City.
James Comey was meeting the
president for the first time.
He showed up at Trump Tower
to meet the president's
national security team,
and then, privately,
he and the president-elect then
had a one-on-one session where
Comey shared with Mr. Trump
information -- he called
it sensitive information
of a salacious nature
that had been gathered
as part of the
Russia investigation.
So, with that background,
here is what James
Comey goes on to say.
They had a meeting.
Here are some specifics now,
beginning with a dinner at the
White House three weeks later
now.
Now, this is January 27,
after Mr. Trump is president.
On that day, the president
invited Comey over.
They dined alone
in the Green Room.
And here's how
Comey describes its.
He says: "My instincts told me
that the one-on-one setting, and
the pretense that this was our
first discussion about my
position, meant the dinner was,
at least in part, an effort
to have me ask for my job
and create some sort of
patronage relationship.
That concerned me
greatly, given the FBI's
traditionally independent
status in the executive
branch.
I replied that I loved my work
and intended to stay and serve
out my 10-year term as director.
"And then, because the set-up
made me uneasy, I added that I
was not 'reliable' in the way
politicians use that word,
but he could always count
on me to tell him the truth.
A few moments later, the
president said, 'I need
loyalty, I expect loyalty.'
I didn't move, speak, or change
my facial expression in any
way during the awkward silence
that followed.
We simply looked at
each other in silence."
Matt Apuzzo, how does
this square with the
reporting you have done?
MATT APUZZO, The New York Times:
Well, a lot of the -- a lot of
the details here, my colleagues
and I have been reporting
out here over the
last several weeks.
But it's hard to overstate just
the extraordinary nature of
the portrait we're seeing here.
We're really getting -- we're
really getting the backstory
to the Jim Comey firing.
We're seeing a president who
was preoccupied with, as you
said, getting the cloud lifted,
the cloud of this Russia
investigation that was -- become
a real liability for the Trump
administration from day one.
And the idea that at
this private dinner that
the president starts
their relationship by
asking for this loyalty pledge,
you can -- you just read these
memos, you can see Comey,
just his anxiety
here in the words.
It just the uncomfortable
-- you know, the discomfort
he has is palpable.
And you can see Trump getting
more and more frustrated that,
you know, why is this guy
not doing what I'm asking?
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Carlin, from
your perspective, what is the
significance of this exchange
of the president
asking for loyalty?
JOHN CARLIN, Former Justice
Department Official:
Well, the FBI has a
unique institutional role,
as does the
Department of Justice.
And so, because both the FBI and
prosecutors in the Department
of Justice may be called
upon to investigate potential
criminal activity by members of
the president's party, by actual
members of the
administration, and in some
circumstances investigate
conduct of a president
him or herself, there's been
a history where the department
has attempted to shield itself
from political interference.
And there have been times in
that history where maintaining
that independence has been
particularly fraught.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHN CARLIN: In my tenure as
chief of staff at the FBI, and
in my time at the department,
I can't recall something
quite like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and I just
want to pick up on that, later
on in that January 27 dinner,
alone with the president
in the White House in the
green room, Mr. Comey writes.
He says: "He then
said, 'I need loyalty.'
I replied, 'You will always
get honesty from me.'
He paused and then said, 'That's
what I want, honest loyalty.'
I paused, and then said,
'You will get that from me.'"
Is that something, John
Carlin, that was appropriate?
JOHN CARLIN: Well, you can
see how the president's
demanding loyalty, that
might be appropriate
in some other context
of a political campaign,
or even other parts
of the administration.
But Director Comey is very
focused, it look likes in that
exchange, and understands the
unique independence of the
role of the FBI director.
And the reason why the statute
was changed so that the FBI
director's term of years is
10 years designed to cut across
administrations to ensure that
the president who appointed
the director, that the
director would outlast the
tenure of that president.
And so Director Comey, I
think, is trying to explain
in this awkward context why he
will be honest, not disloyal in
some sense, but loyal ultimately
to the Constitution and
the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, now I want
to turn both of you to this
-- I think it was their next
meeting, February the 14th, in
a meeting in the Oval Office.
Now, this time it was with
the president, the vice
president, the attorney general,
several other senior
administration officials.
At the end of that meeting,
the president asked everyone
to leave, except for Comey.
And according to Mr. Comey's
statement, Mr. Trump turned
back to the subject of General
Michael Flynn, who had been
fired just the day before, and
he said -- quote -- "'I hope
you can see your way
clear to letting this
go, to letting Flynn go.
He is a good guy.
I hope you can let this go.'"
And Comey writes: "I replied
only that 'he is a good guy.'
I did not say I
would 'let this go.'"
Matt Apuzzo, how does
that square with what
you have reported?
MATT APUZZO: My colleague
Michael Schmidt broke that
exchange a few weeks ago.
But it's no less -- it's no
less remarkable seeing it in
that full context, seeing the
president ask everybody to
leave the Oval Office and speak
alone with the head of the
FBI and say, you
know, let Flynn go.
Just the very nature of we --
people -- we don't have to be
in Washington to understand
why that makes us
feel uncomfortable.
I mean, anybody who has ever
fought a ticket in court, you
know, knows that they don't
- - they don't want to feel
like the criminal justice system
is rigged for people who are
friendly with the politicians.
And so if you're at the
FBI, yes, you are part
of the administration.
You're part of the
Department of Justice.
But they just don't see
themselves as working
for the president when
it comes to criminal
justice stuff, and, as John
said, certainly not when the
investigation touches on the
president's own associates.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, continuing
that now, this is afterward,
the same day, February 14.
Comey writes he spoke with the
attorney general in person.
He said: "I took the opportunity
to implore the attorney
general to prevent any future
direct communication between
me and the president - -
between the president and me.
I told the A.G. what had just
happened -- him being asked to
leave" -- because the attorney
general was one of those who
had been asked the leave the
Oval Office -- "while the FBI
director, who reports to
the A.G., remained behind."
He said: "That was inappropriate
and should never happen.
He did not reply."
John Carlin, how
do we read this?
JOHN CARLIN: I will tell
you, there have been
instances before, let's
say, in a terrorism
incident or a major shooting, in
my experience, where the White
House would sometimes reach
out directly to the FBI.
And it raised concerns, even
when that was the context, and
there were usual media calls
over to the attorney general to
ensure that the department was
aware of the contact directly
with the White House
or with immediate
aides to the president.
But to have the president of
the United States order people
out of the room in order -- you
know, if true, according to this
account -- in order to implore
the director of the FBI to
drop an investigation of
a friend or associate,
that's the core of why
many of our rules and
customs were in place, was to
prevent exactly that type of
conversation or interference
from occurring.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So now, here we
are, a month-and-a-half later.
This is March the 30th.
The president phones
Jim Comey at the FBI.
He repeats the idea of a cloud
over his administration because
of the Russia investigation.
He said: "He said he had
nothing to do with Russia, had
not been involved with hookers
in Russia, and had always
assumed he was being
recorded when in Russia.
He asked what we could
do to 'lift the cloud.'"
So, Matt Apuzzo, we're
back to that same scenario,
back and forth, where
the president is asking
the FBI director
to do something.
MATT APUZZO: Yes.
I mean, look, you can see
why Donald Trump might
be frustrated, right?
Just setting aside the fact
that he's the president, if
you have been told you are not
under investigation personally,
but yet your administration
can't escape the cloud of this
investigation, and you kind
of just want it to be over,
you can see why you would say,
hey, what do I have to
do to make this go away?
If I'm not under investigation,
why can't you just say that?
That's a very human response.
But, as John said, there's
a reason, and there's
a process that you're
supposed to go through
when you reach out
on stuff like this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, and just
finally, John, we're not showing
anymore graphics from the
statement, but it was
on March the 30th.
There was another
phone call where the
president again called,
complaining about the cloud
over his presidency.
And in that conversation,
he said: "If there were some
satellite associates of his who
did something wrong, it would
be good to find that out, but
that he hadn't done anything
wrong and hoped I would find
a way to get it out there."
And then he called Mr. Comey
again on April the 11th, and
talked about loyalty, back and
forth.
He said, "I have been very
loyal to you," and, in essence,
saying, will you be loyal
back to me?
And he said, "At this
point, I didn't answer him."
And you also, today, finally
now, John Carlin, have
the president's attorney
saying the president
feels vindicated.
JOHN CARLIN: Well, I think
in those conversations and
in that back-and-forth,
you also had Director
Comey informing the president,
according to this opening
statement, that he had recounted
their previous conversation
to the then-acting deputy
attorney general, Dana Boente.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
JOHN CARLIN: And when
the president called, I
think, the second time,
the president referenced
and said, should I reach out?
And it sounds like Director
Comey tried to say yes,
you should, through
White House counsel.
And the idea of making a --
potentially making public the
results of an investigation, the
appropriate channel, the one
that's set up, there's actually
a memorandum on White House
contacts that's designed to
ensure that that type of contact
takes place lawyer to lawyer,
White House counsel to
deputy attorney general,
to avoid either the
actuality of interference
with an investigation
or the appearance.
And you can see this kind
of confused back-and-forth.
To me, the most troubling of
the exchanges that are detailed
-- and the rest do provide
context for it -- would
be the direct request
to end an investigation
of an associate, if
true, related to the
investigation of Flynn.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Matt Apuzzo,
just finally, very quickly,
the fact that Director Comey
made these notes immediately
after each one of these meetings
or phone calls, I think,
adds to the remarkable
nature of all this.
MATT APUZZO: That's right.
I mean, you have a you have an
FBI director who clearly was
so uncomfortable with these
interactions, he felt like
he had to document them,
and not just document them.
I mean, it's like, this is where
he was sitting and this is where
he was sitting, and I walked
out the door near the
grandfather clock, and
then, halfway through,
this guy knocked on
the door.
I mean, it is really detailed
stuff that is clearly intended
for future consultation and
to say, this isn't
just my memory.
I sat down and did
this in real time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we should
point out once again the
president's attorney has issued
a statement today saying the
president feels vindicated,
that, he, in essence, thanked
James Comey for repeating
the fact, he said, that
the president himself
wasn't under investigation.
So this will clearly continue.
We're going to hear from
Mr. Comey tomorrow himself.
John Carlin, Matt Apuzzo,
thank you very much.
JOHN CARLIN: Thank you.
MATT APUZZO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the
release of the Comey
statement today came not
long after top intelligence
officials appeared before the
Senate Intelligence Committee.
In public session, at least,
they declined to discuss
conversations with the president
about Russia or
about James Comey.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins the coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: This was
supposed to be about FISA, the
foreign surveillance law used to
thwart terror attacks.
Instead, the Senate
Intelligence hearing became
a high-stakes dance over
the Russia investigation
and President Trump.
National Security
Agency director Michael
Rogers began by saying:
ADM.
MIKE ROGERS, National Security
Agency Director: I have never
been directed to do anything
I believe to be illegal,
immoral, unethical,
or inappropriate.
And to the best of my
recollection during
that same period of
service, I don't recall
ever feeling pressured to do so.
LISA DESJARDINS: But, after
that, it was a day of senators'
questions and intelligence
officials' sidesteps.
SEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia: Did
the president - - the reports
that are out there -- ask you
in any way, shape or form
to back off or downplay
the Russia investigation?
ADM.
MICHAEL ROGERS: I'm not going
to discuss the specifics of
conversations with the president
of the United States.
LISA DESJARDINS: Adding
gravity today, a flurry of
new headlines overnight.
The New York Times reported
that former FBI Director James
Comey asked not to be left
alone with President Trump,
for fear of being pressured.
The Washington Post said
the president asked the
director of national
intelligence to intervene
in the FBI's probe of
former national security
adviser, Michael Flynn.
That DNI, Dan Coats, was in
today's hearing and wouldn't
confirm or deny the story.
DAN COATS, U.S. National
Intelligence Director:
I'm willing to come
before the committee and
tell you what I know
and what I don't know.
What I'm not willing to
do is to share what I
think is confidential
information that ought
to be protected in
an open hearing.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican
Marco Rubio began by
defending the president.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO (R), Florida: I
actually think, if what is being
said to the media is untrue,
then it is unfair to the
president of the United States.
LISA DESJARDINS: But in
an effort to bolster that
view, he got confusion.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO: Is anyone aware
of any effort by anyone in
the White House or elsewhere
to seek advice on how to
influence any investigation?
MAN: My answer is
absolutely no, Senator.
SEN.
MARCO RUBIO: No one has
anything to add to that?
MAN: I don't understand
the question.
LISA DESJARDINS: Democrat
Martin Heinrich went further,
pressing Coats if Trump asked
him to blunt the investigation.
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH (D), New
Mexico: You could clear an awful
lot up by simply saying, it
never happened.
DAN COATS: I don't share -- I
don't share with the general
public conversations that
I have with the president
or many of my administrative
colleagues within the
administration that
I believe are --
shouldn't be shared.
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH: Well, I
think your unwillingness
to answer a very basic
question speaks volumes.
LISA DESJARDINS: Independent
Angus King hammered the intel
chiefs for neither answering nor
explaining why they
weren't answering.
SEN.
ANGUS KING (I), Maine:
Is it an invocation of
executive privilege?
If there is, then
let's know about it.
If there isn't,
answer the questions.
ADM.
MICHAEL ROGERS: I stand by
the comments I have made.
I'm not interested in
repeating myself, sir.
And I don't mean that
in a contentious way.
SEN.
ANGUS KING: Well, I do mean
it in a contentious way.
I don't understand why you're
not answering our questions.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ultimately, the
top two intel chiefs said they
were waiting for more guidance
from the White House,
while Deputy Attorney
General Rod Rosenstein
and acting FBI Director
Andrew McCabe indicated
they don't want to harm the
current special investigation.
As for President Trump himself,
he was in Cincinnati for an
infrastructure event, and
avoided all talk of Russia or
the FBI, but, online, he did
announce Christopher Wray as
his nominee for the
new FBI director.
Wray is a criminal
defense lawyer and former
federal prosecutor who
headed the criminal
division at the
Department of Justice.
He's also known for
representing New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie in
his so-called Bridgegate
scandal.
But before any new director
starts, the spotlight remains on
the man just fired from the job,
who testifies on
Capitol Hill tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins
us now from the Capitol.
Lisa, it was a riveting hearing.
You talked to some of
the senators afterwards.
What are they saying?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
they're actually drawing
two conclusions from today.
One, Judy, Democrats
feel increasingly that
this Trump administration
has a real problem
with both the investigation
and how it is handling it.
Two, the second conclusion,
Democrats and Republicans
alike are not just frustrated.
They're now concerned about the
lack of answers that they got
today and that they have been
getting in the
congressional probe here.
I spoke to Senator John McCain,
a man who you will remember
wished he was an ex-president
right now.
He said after walking away from
that hearing he felt that the
balance of power has clearly
shifted to the executive.
What they're saying here,
Judy, is they're worried about
Congress' power and Congress'
responsibility to look
into these matters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, on James
Comey, we did get his opening
statement, and we have been
dissecting that on the program.
But what are the senators
looking for from him tomorrow?
LISA DESJARDINS: I got to
tell you, Judy, that written
statement has really shifted
expectations here
on Capitol Hill.
For one, I think Democrats
now are very happy to see that
Comey, indeed, plans to lay out
all the red flags that he
saw in his conversations
with President Trump.
They will certainly spend
a lot of time on that.
Republicans, meanwhile,
we will see what they ask.
We know some of their questions
will push back at Mr. Comey,
because he testified previously
in committee, he indicated
that he didn't think there
was any political pressure on
him.
Expect that kind of pushback.
But I think, overall, Judy,
this day began here on Capitol
Hill with many people thinking
James Comey's testimony
might not live up to its
very prominent billing.
But now, Judy, it looks
like it just might.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
was already going to --
everybody was watching
it, and now everyone
- - more than everyone
will be watching.
And I know you are
going to be there for us
tomorrow at the Capitol.
Lisa, thank you.
And we will be here with live
coverage of tomorrow's Senate
hearings with former FBI
Director James Comey.
That's beginning at 10:00 a.m.
Eastern here on PBS and
online at PBS.org/NewsHour.
In the day's other news: The
Islamic State, or ISIS, stunned
the nation of Iran with an
attack into the heart of
its capital city, Tehran.
The targets, Parliament, and
the shrine to the revolutionary
leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini.
When it was over, 13 people
were dead, plus six attackers.
We will have a full report
right after the news summary.
In Britain, the death toll
rose to eight in Saturday's
London Bridge attack.
Teams had been searching
the River Thames today.
They recovered a body, and the
president of France said it
was a 45-year-old Frenchman
who had been missing.
Police also made another
arrest today in connection
with the bridge killings.
President Trump spoke by phone
today with the ruler of Qatar.
The White House says that he
offered to help repair a breach
with Arab states, who accuse
the oil kingdom of
supporting terror.
A day earlier, Mr. Trump
appeared to support
claims made by Saudi
Arabia and other nations
against Qatar.
Meanwhile, Russia's foreign
minister denied a CNN report
that Russian hackers planted
a fake story with Qatar's
state news agency that led
to the diplomatic break.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through translator): I
think that CNN, like some other
mass media outlets, is just
waiting for the type of story
that stinks, or some scandal
to automatically, without any
evidence, add this episode
to the list of Russian sins,
Russian hackers or
someone else linked to
the Russian Federation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The African
nation of Mauritania
today became the latest
to cut diplomatic
relations with Qatar.
A warning today to American
armed forces inside Syria.
Militia groups supporting
President Bashar
al-Assad threatened
to hit U.S. targets if
the U.S. crosses what it
calls any more red lines.
Just yesterday, American
planes bombed pro-government
fighters in Southern Syria.
The Pentagon says they
came close to U.S.-backed
opposition forces.
Back in this country, President
Trump renewed his call to
commit $1 trillion in the years
ahead to overhauling the
nation's infrastructure.
In Cincinnati, he said he has
heard the pleas of voters, and
the days of rebuilding other
countries are over.
DONALD TRUMP, President
of the United States:
We spend trillions and
trillions of dollars
outside our nation, but
we can't build a road,
a highway, a tunnel, a
bridge in our own nation.
And we watch everything
falling into disrepair.
It's time to rebuild our
country, to bring back our
jobs, to restore our dreams.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
also met with family business
owners he said were victims
of rising insurance
premiums under Obamacare.
And he vowed that Republicans
will replace it, or bust.
And on Wall Street today,
the Dow Jones industrial
average gained 37 points
to close at 21173.
The Nasdaq rose 22, and
the S&P 500 added three.
We return to the attacks
in Iran, the implications
and consequences, and
the wider picture in
a greatly unsettled region.
In a moment, William
Brangham will speak with
experts on those questions.
But, to begin, chief foreign
affairs correspondent Margaret
Warner reports on today's terror
in Tehran that left 13 dead
and more than 40 wounded.
MARGARET WARNER: It was
mid-morning when the
first shots echoed from
the Iranian Parliament
building.
Gunmen, some reportedly dressed
as women, stormed in with
rifles and suicide vests.
At least one blew himself up
outside the Parliament chamber.
Another ran back outside and
began firing in the streets.
MOHAMMAD SHAH, Witness (through
translator): When we were
close to the Parliament in a
taxi, there were
more gunfire sounds.
People were panicked
and started running away
and seeking shelter.
MARGARET WARNER: The
resulting siege with
police went on for hours.
Near the same time, the shrine
of Iran's revolutionary founder,
Ayatollah Khomeini, was hit.
Authorities say that, in
the end, six attackers were
killed and five arrested.
The Islamic State group
immediately claimed
responsibility, the first
time the Sunni extremist
group has struck successfully
inside Shiite Iran.
The militants put out
video of the assault while
it was still under way.
One attacker says: "Do
you think we will go away?
No.
We will remain, God willing."
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei,
the Islamic Republic's
supreme leader, was defiant.
AYATOLLAH ALI KHAMENEI,
Supreme Leader of Iran (through
translator): The firecracker
play that took place
today will have no effect
on the people's will.
However, these incidents proved
that if the Islamic republic had
not resisted at the epicenter
of these seditions in Iraq and
Syria, we would be dealing with
many troubles caused by them
inside the country now.
MARGARET WARNER: But
Charlie Winter of the
International Center for
the Study of Radicalization
at King's College, London,
says that, for ISIS, attacking
Iran is like taking the crown
jewel.
CHARLIE WINTER, International
Center for the Study
of Radicalization:
Striking Iran like
this is akin to striking
the United States or Israel.
I mean, this is really
a huge symbolic victory
for the Islamic State.
In terms of its propaganda, I
think the group will be talking
about this moment for years
to come.
MARGARET WARNER: This attack
comes as ISIS is under pressure
from Iranian-backed militias
in Syria and Iraq, as well as
from the U.S.-backed coalition.
The ISIS-controlled Iraqi city
of Mosul has all but fallen
to government forces, aided
by the Shiite militias.
And, in Syria, U.S.-backed
Kurdish fighters have opened a
full-on assault to reclaim the
Islamic State's capital, Raqqa.
It also occurs amidst a spike
in the tense rivalry between
Iran and the Sunni Arab states
led by Saudi Arabia.
Last month, President Trump
rallied Arab nations to oppose
terror, and Iran especially.
And, on Monday, the Saudis
and others cut ties to Qatar,
citing, in part, its ties to
Iran.
Moreover, just hours before
today's attack, Saudi Foreign
Minister Adel Al-Jubeir Iran
- - quote -- "must
be punished" for its
interference in the region.
After the attacks, Iran's
Revolutionary Guard accused the
Saudis, saying: "The fact that
Islamic State has claimed
responsibility proves that they,
the Saudis, were involved."
Charlie Winter says this turn
of events further complicates
regional politics and the fight
against ISIS.
CHARLIE WINTER: Regional
politics are kind of balancing
on a knife edge at the moment.
The more actors there are
involved in this war, the more
confusing it'll get, the more
bogged down states around
the world will get.
MARGARET WARNER: In a statement
this afternoon, the White House
voiced sympathy for the victims,
but said states that sponsor
terrorism risk falling victim
to the evil they promote.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Margaret Warner.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So what does
this first ever ISIS attack
inside actually Iran mean,
and how might Tehran respond?
To help us with that,
I'm joined by two people
with deep knowledge of
Iran and its role in
the region.
Randa Slim is director of the
Track II Dialogues Initiative
at the Middle East Institute.
And Karim Sadjadpour is
a senior fellow in the
Middle East program at
the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace.
Welcome to you both.
Randa Slim, I would
like to start with you.
I wonder if you could just
help us -- give us your sense,
your first reaction to this
attack and, in particular, why
you believe, perhaps, these
two targets were chosen in
Tehran.
RANDA SLIM, Middle East
Institute: Well, they
are important symbols
for Iranian Islamic
Republic.
And they especially the
mausoleum of Imam Khomeini, the
attack outside it is something
that is seen by the
ISIS community, or the
community that is pro-ISIS,
as being an important
symbol to attack because it
symbolizes the heart and the
founder of the Islamic Republic.
And so it is a first attack
claimed by ISIS in Iran.
They have been trying to do
this attack for some time.
And I think the fact that
they have been able to succeed
today will not diminish Iranian
regime resolve to fight ISIS
in Iraq, for example, although
I have to say, in Syria,
they are not devoting
much resources to
fighting ISIS, letting the
Americans lead that fight,
and instead fighting -- mostly
devoting their resources to
fight the Syrian opposition,
the non-jihadi
Syrian opposition.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Karim,
what was you first reaction
when you heard about this?
KARIM SADJADPOUR, Carnegie
Endowment For International
Peace: Well, Iran has
been heavily invested
in regional conflicts
over the last six years.
As Randa mentioned, in
Syria, they have poured
billions of dollars.
They have a thousand
casualties, likewise in Iraq.
They have trained Shia
militias in Yemen.
But they have been largely
immune to the casualties
in the Middle East.
The Iranian people haven't
suffered the same way as peoples
in the region have suffered.
So this was a major
breach in Tehran.
But I still think the fact
that Iran is a country which is
about 90 percent Shiite Muslim,
the city of Tehran is probably
over 95 percent Shia Muslim, I
don't think that ISIS is going
to continue to be able to
make these kinds of attacks in
Iran, because they don't have
the reservoir of support
in Iran that they may have
elsewhere in the Arab world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And, Randa,
as we heard in Margaret Warner's
package at the beginning,
ISIS hitting Iran in
particular was like them
stealing the crown jewels.
For those of us who don't
understand, why is that such
an attractive target to them?
RANDA SLIM: ISIS represents
a -- the Salafi jihadi wing
of -- radical radical wing of
Sunni Islam.
And this is a form of Sunni
Islam that looks at Shias, which
is the main religion of Iran,
as being apostates.
And they look at their vision
of Islam, and their mission
of Islam is to cleanse Islam
of these apostates,
meaning the Shia.
But, also, ISIS is
fighting for its survival.
This is ISIS basically staking
a claim in the leadership
of this Sunni radical jihadi
form of Sunni Islam, even
after they are defeated
in Mosul and after they
are defeated in Raqqa.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Karim, we
saw that, even though ISIS did
claim responsibility for this,
Iran immediately blamed
Saudi Arabia for this attack.
What do you make
of that accusation?
KARIM SADJADPOUR: Well, Iran
and Saudi Arabia have long been
accusing one another of fueling
ISIS.
For the Iranians, ISIS is a
byproduct of Saudi Wahhabist
ideology and Saudi financing.
To the Saudis, ISIS is
a byproduct of Iranian
support for Bashar
al-Assad in Syria and Shia
militias in Iraq which are
killing Sunnis en masse.
The reality is that ISIS poses
a grave threat to Iran, but
an even graver threat to Saudi
Arabia.
So, in theory, these two
countries actually have a
mutual adversary in ISIS.
But what Iran has been doing
which I think is quite dangerous
is conflating Saudi Arabia
and ISIS.
And they put their finger on
something which has a powerful
resonance amongst Iranians.
And whether you're a Shiite
cleric living in (INAUDIBLE)
or a secular Iranian opponent
of the regime living in Los
Angeles, there is this kind
of Persian nationalism against
Saudi Arabia.
They're trying to harness that.
But what's dangerous about that
is not that they blamed Saudi
Arabia for this attack and
they vowed retaliation.
This really has a danger
of escalating this huge
regional war between
Iran and Saudi Arabia,
which has really eclipsed
the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in its
destabilization on the Middle
East.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Randa, as
you heard Karim mention here,
very strong tensions between
Iran and Saudi Arabia.
We also have a proxy
war going on between the
two nations in Yemen.
Do you think that this attack
today -- I guess I'm asking, are
we getting potentially closer
to an all-out conflict
between Iran and Saudi Arabia?
RANDA SLIM: Look, this
attack definitely contributes
to further escalation
in an already volatile
region and in an already
tense relationship between
the two regional powers.
And as we have seen in the
past, when Iran and Saudi Arabia
fight or escalate their fight,
it doesn't stay with
Saudi Arabia and Iran.
It reverberates throughout the
region, and because one way by
which they wage this competition
between them is through proxy
fights in the rest of the
region, be it in Yemen, be it
in Syria, be it in Iraq,
or even be it in Lebanon.
And so we are likely
to see -- as tensions
and as things escalate
between the two countries,
we are likely to see that
being played out again in Yemen
and being played out in Syria
and being played out in Iraq.
What's problematic here is that,
instead of the two regional
countries, Iran and Saudi
Arabia, focusing their resources
and working together on fighting
a common economy to both
of them, which is ISIS, we are
seeing this now escalation in
the relations between them,
leading both to divert their
resources and their attention
from the real joint enemy,
which is ISIS, and focusing it
on waging this fight and this
competition between them in
different proxy sites
around the region.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Karim, I
wonder what you believe the
Trump administration's response
to all this is going to be.
KARIM SADJADPOUR: The Trump
administration has gone back
to kind of the status quo ante
U.S. policy, which is
cooperation with Saudi Arabia
and containment of Iran.
I oftentimes think that
President Trump views
this as just simply siding
with one team against
another, and that's a dangerous
recipe in the Middle East.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Karim Sadjadpour, Randa Slim,
thank you both very much.
KARIM SADJADPOUR:
Thank you, William.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Campaigning has
ended in the fiercely contested
British general election.
Prime Minister Theresa May of
the Conservative Party called
the vote in order to boost her
authority as Britain
negotiates its withdrawal
from the European Union.
Her main challenge
comes from Labor Party
leader, Jeremy Corbyn.
But the campaign has
been overshadowed by two
recent terrorist attacks.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports from London.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Along with
many young Britons, Steve and
Keeley Whitton dream of raising
their children in a
home of their own.
London's expensive real estate
is beyond their reach, and so
they live with Steve's parents.
But affordable housing isn't
top of their election agenda.
Saturday's terrorist attack, two
miles from where they live, is.
KEELEY WHITTON, Voter: A couple
of times, actually, whenever
we have gone out, really,
we have had the conversation,
what are we going to do
if something happens?
STEVE WHITTON, Voter:
If something did happen,
just having a plan,
basically having -- so
I will grab one kid,
she will grab the other.
For the past couple of weeks,
after the terrorist attacks in
Manchester and London, security
has gone up in my own
agenda, as far as who
I'm going to vote for.
And I think a lot of people are
now looking, all right, who's
best going to deliver security?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Vigilance,
tolerance and remembrance
unite these people.
They're from Borough
Market, where the three
Islamist terrorists
lashed out with knives
before being shot dead.
The traders have been kept away
from their businesses, while
forensics experts gathered
evidence.
VERY REV.
ANDREW NUNN, Dean of
Southwark: So, we're going
to keep a moment of silence.
They're keeping it at the
other end of the bridge
in St. Paul's cathedral.
They know we're here.
We know they're there.
We're standing in solidarity,
the two cathedrals and
our communities together.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Sir Simon
Hughes was the area's member
of Parliament for 32 years from
the Liberal Democrats,
the third largest party.
He lost his seat to the
Labor candidate in 2015.
Winning it back would hurt
Labor and help Theresa May.
SIR SIMON HUGHES, Former
Justice Minister: Actually, the
public services are at the top
of people's agenda.
People want us to have the
police we need, the nurses
we need, the doctors we need.
It is now an issue.
The security of the country,
dealing with the very few
people who want to disrupt us
is a major political issue now
in this country, and it will be
the biggest issue on the desk
of the incoming prime minister
and the incoming government.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The belief that
radicalization and terrorism
are fuelled by deprivation,
social isolation, and
Britain's military campaigns
abroad will guide Jill Rose.
JILL ROSE, Voter:
There are two issues.
There are the immediate, about
how we stop or try and stop
more terrorist attacks, and
then the bigger picture
that is equally important.
And, for me, that means voting
Labor in terms of the approach,
changing this world that
really goes back to the
cuts and the approach of
the current government.
MAN: Now would you please
welcome the leader of the
Labor Party, Jeremy Corbyn?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Jeremy
Corbyn's Achilles' heel is
security, say his critics.
They fear Britain's defense
would be weakened by a lifelong
self-professed pacifist taking
control of Britain's Trident
nuclear missile system.
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader, Labor
Party: We have to obviously
try to protect ourselves.
We wouldn't use it as first use.
And if we did use it,
millions are going to die.
You have to think
these things through.
MAN: Close down NATO.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This
conservative ad uses Corbyn's
past and words to attack him.
JEREMY CORBYN: Fight all
the cuts, except those
in the armed forces.
Our friends from Hezbollah,
friends from Hamas.
KATE HOEY, Labor M.P.: I don't
think people need fear because
he said something 30 years
ago or appeared with somebody.
You know, we have all had
our past and our histories.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Kate Hoey has
been a Labor M.P. for 28 years,
and her seat is under threat
because she supported Brexit.
KATE HOEY: I think Jeremy
would know that, being prime
minister, the first duty is to
protect the British public.
And I think, even though
he has said things in the
past, people grow into a job.
And I think I have
seen changes in Jeremy.
I have known him for a very
long time, and even over the
last year, I have seen how he's
changed, in terms of the
way he puts his views.
MAN: Please welcome the leader
of the Conservative Party, the
prime minister, Theresa May.
MALCOLM BRABANT: When Theresa
May called the snap election
in April, the Conservatives
were 17 percent ahead of Labor.
Her refusal to debate Corbyn
helped erode the advantage.
MAN: You have called a general
election for the good of the
Conservative Party, and it's
going to backfire on you.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: No, I called...
(APPLAUSE)
THERESA MAY: I called a general
election because I believe that
the British people have a right
to vote and to say who they
want to see leading them
through the Brexit negotiations.
MATTHEW PARRIS, Columnist,
The Times: She has personally
been winged like a bird's been
winged.
She has appeared
inadequate and indecisive.
She has changed her
mind, and pretended that
she hasn't changed her
mind, and I don't think
people will ever see her in
quite the same way again.
MALCOLM BRABANT: From his
Thames-side warehouse loft,
former conservative M.P.
Matthew Parris, now a respected
columnist, has written some
damning commentaries about
the prime minister.
MATTHEW PARRIS: She doesn't
have those quicksilver
qualities that are perhaps
needed in a statesman
and needed in negotiation.
She's rigid.
THERESA MAY: The
conservative party can
build a better Britain.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This song,
banned from the air by the BBC,
has hit the top of the British
charts.
WOMAN (singing):
She's a liar, liar.
Oh, she's a liar, liar.
Oh, you can't trust
her, no, no, no.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But above this
betting shop in East London,
there's optimism in the campaign
office of Conservative
candidate Lee Scott.
He's trying to reclaim a seat
lost to Labor in 2015, and
says he's reaping the benefit
of May's promise to
crack down on extremists.
LEE SCOTT, Candidate
for Parliament: They
are totally committed
to going out and voting
for me.
SASHA JOHNSTON, Voter: Anyone
slightly to the right is being
made to feel almost guilty
to have to be center-right.
LEE SCOTT: You know, they want
to try and make people feel
guilty to love their country,
guilty to want to stand
up for what's right,
guilty for wanting to
try to have a firm law
and order policy.
They're not going to work.
And on the doorsteps, people
are saying to me that it's
about strong leadership.
And that strong leadership
is coming from Theresa May,
certainly not from Mr. Corbyn.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The latest
opinion polls suggest that
Theresa May's gamble will pay
off, and that she will be
returned to office with
an increased majority.
But many pollsters have been
wrong in the recent past, most
notably failing to correctly
predict the Brexit vote during
last year's E.U. referendum.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in London.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Thank you, Malcolm.
And we will be back shortly with
our series done by students,
Limitless, about people
living with disabilities.
But, first, take a
moment to hear from
your local PBS station.
NEXT, WE TAKE A MOMENT TO LOOK
AT THE SPECIFIC SKILLS SOME
COMPANIES WANT THEIR ENTRY-LEVEL
EMPLOYEES TO HAVE, AND WHAT
COLLEGES MIGHT DO TO MAKE
SURE THEIR GRADUATES ARE READY
TO HIT THE GROUND RUNNING.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THIS
STORY, WHICH ORIGINALLY
AIRED LAST FALL.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Graduation
day at Georgetown University.
It takes four years, more
than $200,000, and a lot
of hard work to get here.
But now more employers
are asking, what does a
four-year degree really mean?
What true marketable
skills can new graduates
offer the work force?
Georgetown University is
trying to answer that question.
RANDALL BASS, Professor,
Georgetown University:
We're hearing from
employers, how do you
differentiate between
two graduates?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Professor
Randall Bass leads the college's
Designing the Future Initiative.
RANDALL BASS: If you have got
a pile of 10 graduates who
all have degrees from quality
liberal arts schools,
and they all look more
or less alike in terms of
their formal credentials,
are there ways to
differentiate them?
<<TEACHER TALKING>>
HARI SREENIVASAN: Last
semester, Bass and
colleagues at Georgetown
offered a free experimental
course for students who want to
further distinguish themselves.
Instead of receiving
a traditional credit,
students who meet the
requirements are awarded
a digital badge.
RANDALL BASS: What we see in
the badges is a way of trying
to help students tell a story
about some dimension of their
learning that might otherwise
be merely a line on their
resume.
DESY OSUNSADE, Talent
Acquisition, Arabella Advisors:
A resume has never been enough.
That's why the concept of
badging is appealing to me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Job
recruiters, like Desy
Osunsade, see digital
badges as a way to better
define talent.
DESY OSUNSADE: We spend a lot
of time and money as recruiters
trying to make sure that
we have the perfect fit,
because recruiting is expensive.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Osunsade recruits for
Arabella Philanthropic
Investment Advisors.
She says a degree doesn't say
enough about a potential hire.
DESY OSUNSADE: It tells me
the person's line of study.
It doesn't tell me if they are
good at things like critical
thinking, problem-solving, do
they work well in teams, do they
have great oral communication?
A resume, in itself, with
a degree from anywhere
does not tell me that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The digital
badge offered by Georgetown
is called a Catalyst Badge.
Alexis Oni-Eseleh
participated in the pilot.
ALEXIS ONI-ESELEH: The Catalyst
Badge is just affirming that
when we see something that
needs to be changed, we just
go about it, proving that
you are an agent of change in
accomplishing the goals
you set for yourself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Don Fraser,
from the Education Design Lab,
works with Georgetown, George
Mason University, and University
of Virginia, as part of a
larger effort called the 21st
Century Skill Badging Challenge.
HARI SREENIVASAN: If I'm an
employer, I'm going to get a
better employee if they have
badges that say they are
a creative problem solver
or critical thinker, a
good oral communicator?
DON FRASER, Education Design
Lab: If there's rigor in those
badges, I would - and those
are skills that you find
valuable in the work that
you're doing, I would say yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More so than
just if they came out of a
specific school with a certain
degree?
DON FRASER: Exactly, right,
because they have been working
specifically to acquire those
skills, which is totally
different than the implicit way
in which we believe they are
getting those right now, hoping
that by the time they graduate
and get this degree, they
have gained these
skills in some capacity.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Anthony
Carnevale is the director of
the Georgetown University Center
on Education and the Workforce.
ANTHONY CARNEVALE, Director,
Center on Education and
the Workforce: What's
happening is that
the on-the-job training
is no longer sufficient,
because employers don't
commit to employees
for a lifetime the way they
used to, so we have got to
get our own job training.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In may,
Alexis Oni-Eseleh graduated
from Georgetown with a major in
global health and a minor
in women's gender studies.
Since graduation, she has
been helping with her parents'
company and will start a more
serious job search this fall.
ALEXIS ONI-ESELEH: Here
it is, certification
Catalyst Credential.
I had to pass a certain
level of criteria,
which you can find here.
And if you click there, it
will take you to this Web site,
which tells you everything
I needed to do to
become a Catalyst.
The Catalyst Credential
is awarded to a student
who embraces challenges,
demonstrates initiative,
pursues positive social change.
DON FRASER: You host
them online, and they're
hosted digitally.
People have the ability to click
on that badge and get at the
metadata associated with how
the learner, the student
achieved that particular badge.
So, if I am so inclined, I
can look at assessments that
were a part of that badge.
I can look at the work, the body
of work that the student did
in order to earn that badge.
ANNOUNCER: The same degree
from different schools
produces different workers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some
emerging for-profit education
ventures see a much bigger role
for digital badges.
RYAN CRAIG, Director,
University Ventures: A
degree doesn't say a lot.
A badge or a micro-credential
can say a lot more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ryan Craig
is the author of "College
Disrupted: The Great Unbundling
of Higher Education."
RYAN CRAIG: The primary
credential that we use in our
labor market is the degree.
That's the sort of
default credential.
Micro-credentials, or
badges, breaks that down
into literally competencies.
What micro-credentials
are signaling is the
shift from degree-based
hiring to competency-based
hiring.
ANNOUNCER: That's right,
LinkedIn, it's not just
for top executives.
It's for you, and it's the
perfect place for you to
start your professional story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Craig points
to Microsoft and its recent
purchase of LinkedIn as new
players in the field of
post-secondary education
because they offer educational
training, certificates,
and a marketplace
to display skills.
RYAN CRAIG: Competency
marketplaces, we think,
are the way in which
a decade from now are,
most post-secondary
education will be purchased.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But
Anthony Carnevale cautions
that commercial badges,
micro-credentials,
and certificates
need more scrutiny.
ANTHONY CARNEVALE: It's a
whole industry where I there's
no transparency, no consumer
protection, so let the buyer
beware of what happened to the
people who took this course,
got this badge, so that
people can tell if something
is worth the money.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alexis
Oni-Eseleh says she recently
used the Catalyst badge in a job
interview.
ALEXIS ONI-ESELEH: The
interviewer asked me to
talk about a time where
I showed initiative,
and I was able to talk about
the digital badge and all the
steps I had to take in order to
get it and to qualify for it.
And I even encouraged her
to go look up the digital
badge on my LinkedIn page.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This fall,
designers of the badge challenge
are expanding their reach
to colleges who serve
non-traditional students,
who often have a harder
struggle to find jobs.
In Washington, D.C.,
I'm Hari Sreenivasan
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we continue
our series Limitless, produced
by middle and high school
students, looking at people with
disabilities dealing with the
challenges of everyday life.
Tonight, a remarkable
young boy who was born
with a heart disease.
The story was produced by
our Student Reporting Labs
and reporter Emma Kate Woods.
She's an eighth grader at report
Dalton Middle School in Georgia.
JERRY BRUCE HENNON, Suffers
From Heart Disease: I was born
with a hypoplastic left heart,
which, it's very rare, and
it's -- you're born with
literally half of heart.
EMMA KATE WOODS: Jerry
Bruce Hennon is a happy,
easy-going 11-year- old
boy who was born with
a congenital heart disease.
JERRY BRUCE HENNON: Your heart
beats like ba-bup, ba-bup.
Mine was that, but ba-bup,
ba-bup, ba-bup, twice as fast.
And it had to work
for left and right.
And this hand's
always been weak.
It's getting stronger.
EMMA KATE WOODS: Hypoplastic
left heart syndrome is
a birth defect where
the left side of the
heart doesn't form correctly,
severely restricting blood
flow through the heart.
As a result, the heart cannot
pump oxygen-rich blood through
the body properly, causing a
life-threatening condition.
When he was three days old,
Jerry Bruce suffered a stroke,
leaving his left side partially
paralyzed.
In order to live, Jerry Bruce
need a heart transplant,
which he fortunately received
on June 4, 2016, a procedure
he knows has changed his life.
JERRY BRUCE HENNON: The
transplant, I feel like that's
the greatest and worst possible
thing that could
ever happen to me.
EMMA KATE WOODS: Jerry
Bruce is very close with his
family, especially his mother.
JERRY BRUCE HENNON: This bond
is the strongest between a
mother and a son to ever live.
I promise you that.
LISA HENNON, Mother of
Jerry Bruce: You know,
I don't know if anybody
else with a special-needs
child will understand that.
You do love all of
your children, but
it's just different.
His little classmates
are tight and take good
care of him, you know?
I think they will
always be there.
And he's got a good
support group in his class.
EMMA KATE WOODS: A student at
Westwood Elementary School, his
classmates and his fourth grade
teacher Ms. Bailey have seen
his struggles first hand.
PAQUITA BAILEY, Teacher: He's
had such a tough little life.
He's had to go through
so much from birth.
So, I think all of the surgeries
and things like that he's had
throughout his entire existence
on earth made him stronger
just as an individual, but
he's still the same little boy.
He's no different.
EMMA KATE WOODS: Jerry Bruce's
strength and determination
have made him a local hero,
earning the nickname Superman.
MEREDITH DILBECK, Friend of
Jerry Bruce: I think he just
loves, like, Superman, like,
Batman, and all that stuff.
Our school has really reflected
on that, just him being like
Superman and like saving the
world and all that.
JERRY BRUCE HENNON: Just the
joy that God's given you is like
a chance, because most people
don't get that.
LISA HENNON: You just want
your child to live, or
that's -- that's how I felt.
And, you know, he could
be a rocket scientist.
You don't have to play
football to be a man
or a successful person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jerry,
we are in awe of you.
And, Emma Kate, you have
a future as a reporter.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
And don't forget, join us for
live coverage of former FBI
Director James Comey's testimony
before the Senate
Intelligence Committee.
That is tomorrow at 10:00 a.m.
Eastern on PBS and
live-streaming on PBS.org,
on Facebook and YouTube.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.